Computer Viruses: Dealing with Electronic Vandalism and Pro-
grammed  Threats  by  Eugene  Spafford, Kathleen Heaphy, and
David Ferbrache.  1989, 109 pages.  Published by ADAPSO.

     The book has been written to be an accessible  resource
guide  for  computer  users and managers (PC and mainframe).
It presents a high-level  discussion  of  computer  viruses,
explaining how they work, who writes them, and what they do.
It is not intended to serve  as  a  technical  reference  on
viruses,  both because the audience for such a work would be
limited, and because such a reference  might  serve  to  aid
potential virus authors.

     The goal of the book is to  dispel  some  common  myths
about  viruses (and worms, trojan horses, et. al.), and pro-
vide simple, effective suggestions for how to  protect  com-
puter   systems   against  these  threats.   It  furthermore
stresses that most systems face greater threats  from  other
areas,  so  the  proper  attitude  to  take is to strengthen
overall security; concrete suggestions for enhancing overall
security are also presented.

     The appendices provide extensive  references  to  other
publications,  security  organizations,  anti-viral software
sources, applicable (U.S.)  state and Federal  laws  against
computer  crime,  and  detailed  descriptions of all IBM and
Apple Macintosh viruses known as of 1 October 1989.

     Although written for ADAPSO members,  almost  any  com-
puter  user  should find it instructive.  The appendices are
an excellent source of further  information,  addresses  and
phone  numbers,  and  pointers  to  software.   At least one
university professor has indicated he will use the book in a
security  course, and some law enforcement agencies are also
considering using the book for instructional purposes.

     The authors are interested  in  comments  and  feedback
about  the book, especially in areas where information might
be added.  You can contact them by sending mail to  ``virus-
book@cs.purdue.edu''

Table of Contents:
  Preface
  Executive Summary
  Introduction
  Programmed Threats
    Definitions
    Damage
    Authors
    Entry
    Summary
  What is a Computer Virus?
    Names
    A History Lesson
    Formal Structure
    How do viruses spread?
    The three stages of a virus's life
    Replication strategies
    Recognizing a viral infection
  Dealing with Viruses
    Prevention
    Detection of a viral infection
    Recovery
    Summary
  Security
    A definition of security
    Security as a goal
    Risk assessment
    Some General Approaches
    Summary
  Legal Issues
    Criminal laws
    Civil suits
    Summary
  Attitudes
  Further Information on Viruses
    Characteristic lengths
    Names of Known Viruses
    Known IBM PC viruses by Characteristics
    Known Apple Macintosh Viruses
    Characteristic resources for Mac viruses
  Information on Anti-Viral Software
    Selected reviews of Anti-viral Software
    Easily obtained software
    Internet Archives
    Other Places to Look
  Further Information on Legal Aspects of Viruses
    Federal Laws
    State Laws
    Other Sources of Information
  Further Reading and Resources
    Organizations and Associations
    Government Agencies
    Journals and Newsletters
    Other Readings

A copy can be ordered from

                     ADAPSO
                     1300 North Seventeenth St.
                     Suite 300
                     Arlington, VA 22209  USA
                     Attn: Mr. John Gracza

Single copies are $30.  Copies ordered  on  university  sta-
tionery  or on stationery of ADAPSO member companies is only
$20, and $16 for the second and subsequent copies.

     Requests for review copies  or  special  considerations
should  be  addressed  directly to John Gracza.  Copies have
been given away to  ADAPSO  member  companies,  and  various
state  and  Federal  law enforcement agencies, so check with
others in your organization to see if a copy  isn't  already
available for review.

     Overseas orders will be shipped surface mail.  Overseas
orders  that  are  to  be shipped air mail should include an
additional $10 for postage. All payment should be in US dol-
lars, no cash or stamps.
